Ledger Live Bot (#23)
LedgerHQ/LedgerHQ.github.io: _posts/2021-03-18-ledger-live-bot.md

---
layout: post
title: Ledger Live Bot
author: Gaëtan Renaudeau & Valentin De Almeida
summary: Introducing a testing framework created last year to automate blockchain testing during recent Ledger Live coin integration scaling.
featured-img: ledgerlive
categories: Tech
---

# Ledger Live Bot

Last year has been a great scaling period for the Ledger Live software.

> We went from 3 to 9 families of coins supported, shipped features like [Secure Swap](https://blog.ledger.com/secure-swap/), Staking _(Tezos delegation, Tron votes, Cosmos validation, Algorand staking and very recently, Polkadot)_ ...  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We went from 3 to 9 families of supported coins, and shipped features like [Secure Swap](https://blog.ledger.com/secure-swap/) or Staking _(Tezos delegation, Tron votes, Cosmos validation, Algorand staking and very recently, Polkadot)_ ...  
```

> As the list of features and new coins supported in Ledger Live grew, we quickly realized that our testing flow would not scale. Previously, our QA Team needed to test all the different features for each coin manually. With both increasing in number, the process was becoming longer and more tedious. That is when we decided to tackle this problem with a new approach: __automate end-to-end testing for each family of coins alongside its respective features__!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As the list of new supported features and coins in Ledger Live grew, we quickly realized that our testing flow would not scale. Previously, our QA Team needed to test all the different features for each coin manually. With both increasing in number, the process was becoming longer and more tedious. That is when we decided to tackle this problem with a new approach: __automate end-to-end testing for each family of coins alongside its respective features__!
```

> Let's rewind a bit and see the context here. We are talking about end-to-end testing on different blockchains. Blockchains are _immutable_ by design. Once an operation has been broadcasted, there is no way to come back to a _previous_ state of the blockchain. This mean we would not be able to replay any test case or scenario.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's rewind a bit and have a look at the context here. We are talking about end-to-end testing on different blockchains. Blockchains are _immutable_ by design. Once an operation has been broadcasted, there is no way to come back to a _previous_ state of the blockchain. This means we would not be able to replay any test case or scenario.  
```

> At some point we thought about _testnet blockchains_, but it still might not yield the same result as a _mainnet_. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
At some point we considered _testnet blockchains_, but it still might not yield the same result as a _mainnet_. 
```

> So, with the context in mind and the expectations of real life conditions, that's when we decided to create the **Ledger Live Bot**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
So, with the context and the real life conditions in mind, we decided to create the **Ledger Live Bot**.
```

## What is Ledger Live Bot?

> The Ledger Live Bot is a _framework_ we build internally to allow the automation of transaction testing on all Ledger Live supported coins and features, in the most end-to-end approach possible.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Ledger Live Bot is a _framework_ we built internally to allow the automation of transaction testing on all Ledger Live supported coins and features, in the most end-to-end approach possible.
```

> **The Ledger Live Bot test implicitly a lot of things with a very simple spec file.**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**The Ledger Live Bot implicitly tests a lot of things with a very simple spec file.**
```

=> INSERT SCREENSHOT ON A COMMIT TEST REPORT

### Philosophy

> When we built the bot, we set a few principles that would help us make it into the tool we needed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When we built the bot, we set a few principles that would help us create the tool we needed.
```

- **Stateless**: My state _is_ the blockchain.
- **Configless**: I only need a _seed_ and a _coinapps_ folder.
- **Autonomous**: I simply restore my accounts using the seeds and continue from here.
- **Generative**: I send funds to sibling accounts to create new accounts and rotate funds. My only costs are network fees.
- **Data Driven**: My engine is simple and I do actions based on data specs that drive my capabilities.
- **End to End**: I rely on the complete "Ledger stack"
  - live-common: the library behind Ledger Live logic (deriving accounts, transaction logic...) (open source)
  - Speculos: the Ledger devices emulator (open source)
  - coinapps: a folder containing the apps needed by Speculos (closed source)
- **Realistic**: I am very close to the flow used by Ledger Live users and what they do with their device. I can even press the devices' buttons.

> - **Completeness**: I can _technically_ do anything a user can do in Ledger Live with their account (send, but also any feature from Leger Live like delegations, freeze, staking...), but I do it faster 🤖

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Completeness**: I can _technically_ do anything a user can do in Ledger Live with its account (send, but also any feature from Leger Live like delegations, freeze, staking...), but I do it faster 🤖
```

- **Automated**: I can run on Github Actions (runners) and comment on the Pull Requests and Commits.

## How to automate device testing with Speculos, the Ledger hardware wallet emulator

One of our main bottleneck is obviously the use of real, physical devices to go through all the different flows and transactions.  
To do this, we rely on a technology developed at Ledger and released in 2019: [Speculos](https://speculos.ledger.com/).

> Now equipped with a "software" version of our device that can be piloted by an API, we were ready to start working on the bot.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now equipped with a "software" version of our device that can be driven by an API, we were ready to start working on the bot.
```

Here are some examples of how we build our interactions with Speculos.

The first iteration looked like something like that:
```js
function deviceActionAcceptBitcoin({
  // transport is an ojbect that represent the connection 
  // to a device
  transport,
  
  // events are received from Speculos and give us what is 
  // currently displayed on the device, allowing us to 
  // react to the different states
  event,
}: {
  transport: Transport<*> & { button: (string) => void },
  event: { type: string, text: string },
}) {
  // This is where we react to what is on screen
  if (event.text.startsWith("Accept")) {
    // Using Speculos API to trigger button actions, just
    // like a real user! Here we press both buttons
    transport.button("LRlr");
  } else if (
    // Same here, we react to certain keywords displayed on
    // the device
    event.text.startsWith("Review") ||
    event.text.startsWith("Amount") ||
    event.text.startsWith("Address") ||
    event.text.startsWith("Confirm") ||
    event.text.startsWith("Fees")
  ) {
    // And we trigger a push on the right button
    transport.button("Rr");
  }
}
```

> Although functionning at first, we reworked it so we could also make assertions on what the device displays.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Even though it was functional, we reworked it so we could also make assertions on what the device displays.
```

```js
const acceptTransaction: DeviceAction<Transaction, *> = deviceActionFlow({
  // Array of `steps` which are basically the 
  // different screens displayed on the device
  steps: [
    
    // Here we have a more concise and unified format
    // for all the steps
    {
      // Text displayed on the device
      title: "Amount",
      // Which button to press
      button: "Rr",
      // And here is the interesting part where
      // we can make assertion with the data provided
      // by the device AND the account/status data
      // linked to the transactions
      expectedValue: ({ account, status }) => ...,
    },
    
    {
      title: "Fees",
      button: "Rr",
      expectedValue: ({ account, status }) => ...,
    },
    {
      title: "Address",
      button: "Rr",
      expectedValue: ...,
    },
    {
      title: "Review",
      button: "Rr",
    },
    {
      title: "Confirm",
      button: "Rr",
    },
    {
      title: "Accept",
      button: "LRlr",
    },
  ],
});
```

## The coin spec, or the backbone of our tests

> To make our bot _smart_ in its decision making process, we rely on `specs` files. A **coin spec** defines all possible mutations on the blockchain (supported by Ledger Live) as well as the expectation after the mutation has been broadcasted. This is where things get fun, as we said earlier, there is no way to "replay" scenarios on the blockchain. To compensate for these limitations, we came up with a new way, focusing on the _account state_ before and after the mutations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To make our bot _smart_ in its decision making process, we rely on `specs` files. A **coin spec** defines all possible mutations on the blockchain (supported by Ledger Live) as well as the expectation after the mutation has been broadcasted. This is where things get fun: as we said earlier, there is no way to "replay" scenarios on the blockchain. To compensate for these limitations, we came up with a new way, focusing on the _account state_ before and after the mutations.
```

        const sibling = pickSiblings(siblings);
        const recipient = sibling.freshAddress;
        // We update the transaction and return it
        t = bridge.updateTransaction(t, { useAllAmount: true, recipient });
        return t;
      },
      // Here we plug a `deviceAction` that will take care of the various
      // screens displayed on the device
      deviceAction: deviceActionAcceptBitcoin,
      // And finally, the assertion
      // Here we get a lot of informations about the previous and current account
      // state as well as transaction and some other data 
      // we can use to make some assertions
      test: ({
        account,
        accountBeforeTransaction,
        transaction,
        optimisticOperation,
        operation,
      }) => {
        // This is where we need to be creative:
        // as scenarios cannot be replayed, we described our tests
        // to be some sort of "meta" assertions. 
        expect(account.balance.toString()).toBe("0");
      },
    },
  ],
};
```

## The Bot Logic

So now that we have an API to control a software version of our device, and the spec files, how does the bot work?  

> When we run the tests (running inside Jest runner currently), we will spawn an emulator with the metadata from the \[coin\]Spec, which gives us a firmware version and an app version for the family/currency we want to test. Then the bot processes the spec and creates a list of possible mutations for each account available. Then it will randomly choose one of the mutations from the list, and will try to play it (send, delegate...). The bot then tries to wait until the transaction just created appears in the blockchain, and tries to do the assertion then.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When we run the tests (running inside Jest runner currently), we spawn an emulator with the metadata from the \[coin\]Spec, which gives us a firmware version and an app version for the family/currency we want to test. Then the bot processes the spec and creates a list of possible mutations for each account available. Next it will randomly choose one of the mutations from the list, and will try to play it (send, delegate...). After that, the bot tries to wait until the newly created transaction appears in the blockchain, and then tries to do the assertion.
```

> We decided to take this approach so the bot will behave a bit more "human-like", shuffling between the different types of operations. We know we do not cover _each_ case possible on each run. This is a choice we made as we decided to look into those tests with a Long Tail philosophy (it's throughout many runs that we eventually cover all possible scenarios).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We decided to take this approach so the bot will behave a bit more "human-like", shuffling between the different types of operations. We know we do not cover _each_ case possible on each run. This is a choice we made as we decided to look into those tests with a Long Tail philosophy (after many runs we will eventually cover all possible scenarios).
```

> Since the bot is just a script that gets executed in a test runner, we could easily automate its runs with Github Action (running as a cronjob). Doing so gives us the opportunity to comment on Pull Requests and Commits automatically, posting reports of each of its run.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Since the bot is just a script that gets executed in a test runner, we could easily automate its runs with Github Action (running as a cronjob). Doing so gives us the opportunity to comment on Pull Requests and Commits automatically, posting reports of each of its runs.
```
